# Rust Quiz#1

## 题目

下面的 1 输出是什么？

```rs
macro_rules! m {
    ($( $s:stmt )*) => {
        $(
            { stringify!($s); 1 }
        )<<*
    };
}

fn main() {
    print!(
        "{}{}{}",
        m! { return || true },
        m! { (return) || true },
        m! { {return} || true },
    );
}
```

1. The program exhibits undefined behavior
2. The program does not compile
3. The program is guaranteed to output: [ ]

## 解答

122

这个问题围绕着 Rust 的语法边界设计。

> This question revolves around where the Rust grammar places statement
> boundaries.

宏的输入规则是 `$( $s:stmt )*`, 它能够匹配到 0 或多个 Rust 语句。该规则内部的 `$s: stmt`
是一个片段分类符，它能够匹配到一个符合 Rust 语法规范的表达式。被匹配到的语句可以在展开后的代码中作为 `$s` 。而外部的 `$(...)*`
部分表示一个重复，它可以重复匹配 0 或多次内容。

> The input rule of the macro m! is $($s:stmt)* which matches zero or more Rust
> statements. The $(...)* part of the rule is a repetition which matches the
> contents of the repetition zero or more times, and the $s:stmt is a fragment
> specifier that matches a Rust statement (stmt) conforming to the rules of the
> Rust grammar. The matched statements are available within the expanded code as
> the fragment variable $s.

语句是函数体中允许的最高级别的语法单位。下面所有的内容都是语句的例子。

> A statement is the top-level unit of syntax permitted within a function body.
> All of the following are examples of statements.

```rs
// Items are statements.
struct S { x: u64 }

// Let-bindings are statements.
let mut s = S { x: 1 }

// Expressions are statements.
s.x + 1
```

函数体的语法要求某些类型的语句后面有一个分号，但对于宏的语法而言，分号并不是语句的一部分。

> The grammar of function bodies requires that some types of statements are
> followed by a semicolon, but the semicolon is not part of the statement for
> the purpose of macro syntax.

m! 将会展开为 0 或多个由 `<<` 分割的 `{ stringify!($s); 1 }`。`$(...)<<*` 部分表示重复语句之间使用 `<<`
作为分隔符

> The macro m! expands to zero or more copies of `{ stringify!($s); 1 }`
> separated by the `<<` token. The `$(...)<<*` part of the rule is a repetition
> using `<<` as the separator.

在宏中使用 `<<` 作为分隔符非常不常见。最常用的分隔符是逗号，`$(...),*`，其他的单一符号也是允许的。重要的是，`macro_rules!` 把所有的 Rust 内置操作符都当成单 token
> Using `<<` as a separator in a repetition in a macro is highly unusual. The
> most commmonly used separator is the comma, written as `$(...),*`, but any
> other single token is allowed here. Crucially, macro_rules! treats all
> built-in Rust operators as single tokens, even those that consist of multiple
> characters like <<.

The `{ stringify!($s); 1 }` is an expression whose value is always 1. The value
of `stringify!($s)` is discarded, so this is equivalent to the expression
`{ 1 }`. The reason for having `stringify!($s)` in there is to control the
number of times the repetition is repeated, which is determined by which
fragment variables are used within the repetition. Writing a repetition without
using any fragment variables inside of it would not be legal.

Suppose we call this macro with three of the statements shown above as input.

```rs
m! {
    struct S { x: u64 }
    let mut s = S { x: 1 }
    s.x + 1
}
```

The macro expands to:

```rs
{ stringify!(struct S { x: u64 }); 1 }
    << { stringify!(let mut s = S { x: 1 }); 1 }
    << { stringify!(s.x + 1); 1 }
```

Each of the stringifys expands to a string literal:
2
```rs
{ "struct S { x: u64 }"; 1 }
    << { "let mut s = S { x: 1 }"; 1 }
    << { "s.x + 1"; 1 }
```

The values of the string literals are not used. In this case the expression is
equivalent to `{ 1 } << { 1 } << { 1 }`, which is equivalent to `1 << 1 << 1`.
The `<<` operator is left-associative; the numeric value of this expression
is 4.

Altogether, the relevant behavior of this macro is that it evaluates to
`1 << 1 << 1 << ...` where the number of ones is equal to the number of Rust
statements in the input of the macro. In closed form, the numeric value is
`1 << (n - 1)` where n is the number of statements, except in the case that n is
zero where the macro expands to nothing and we get a syntax error at the call
site.

It remains to determine how many statements are in the three invocations of m!
in the quiz code.

1. `return || true`

This is a return-expression that would return the closure `|| true`. It is
equivalent to return `(|| true)`. It is parsed as a single statement so the m!
invocation evaluates to

2. `(return) || true`

This is a logical-OR expression. The `||` is a binary operator, where the
left-hand side is the expression `(return)` (of diverging type `!`) and the
right-hand side is the expression `true`. This expression is a single statement
so m! again evaluates to 1.

3. `{return} || true`

This one is two statements! A block-statement `{return}` followed by a closure
expression `|| true`.

The Rust grammar distinguishes between expressions that require a semicolon in
order to stand alone as a statement, and expressions that can be statements even
without a semicolon. Consider two examples:

```rs
// No trailing semicolon required.
for t in vec {
    /* ... */
}

// Trailing semicolon required.
self.skip_whitespace()?;
```

The list of expression types that stand alone without a semicolon is defined
here in libsyntax. The distinction informs a few different early bail-out cases
where the parser decides to finish parsing the current expression.

Relevant to our case is that block expressions `{ /* ... */ }` terminate an
expression if doing so would be syntactically sensible. The parser does not
eagerly consume binary operators after a block expression. Thus one might write:

```rs
fn f() -> &'static &'static bool {
    // Block expression.
    {
        println!("What a silly function.");
    }

    // Reference to reference to true.
    &&true
}
```

In order to parse a block followed by a binary operator, we would need to make
it syntactically insensible for the parser to terminate an expression at the
close curly brace. This would usually be done by wrapping in parentheses.

```rs
fn f() -> bool {
    ({ true } && true)
}
```

Anyhow, the output of the program is 112.

You have answered 2 of 33 questions correctly.
